The dimensions of DNA in solution

Abstract
Combined measurement of the rotational and translational frictional coefficients of rod-like DNA molecules in dilute aqueous solution yields 22 to 26 Å for the hydrodynamic diameter and 3·34(± 0·1) Å for the length per base-pair.

The dimensions of the B form DNA helix in a fiber are well known (Langridge et al.,1969). The pitch is 33.6 A, and there are 10.0 base-pairs per turn, with a rise of
3.36 A per base-pair. However, there is increasing evidence for morphological diversity of DNA, both in the solid state (Wang et al., 1979; Arnott et al., 1980; Wing et al., 1980) and in solution (Pohl, 1976). It is now clear that DNA structure in solution deviates slightly but appreciably from the B DNA model as based on fiber diffraction studies. Wang (1979) and Rhodes & Klug (1980) found that there are about 10.5 base-pairs per helical turn, and Hogan et al. (1978) reported evidence
for propeller twisting of the base-pairs, using a technique that has subsequently reaffirmed structures with flat base-pairs in solution for both A and Z forms of
DNA (Wu et cd., 1981). 

In this context it seemed to us appropriate to examine as carefully as possible the dimensional properties of DNA in solution to determine the extent of possible
further deviations from the B form. We used hydrodynamic techniques to accomplish this end, utilizing a two-stage strategy. First, we combined measurements of the translational and rotational frictional coefficients, allowing us to determine the hydrodynamic diameter of the DNA helix. Next, with the diameter fixed, we estimated the rise per base-pair, by extrapolation of the apparent rise per base-pair of slightly flexible molecules to zero bendability of the helix. The apparent rise per base-pair was determined from the rotational frictional coefficient, interpreted using an empirical formula generated by a study of the frictional properties of macroscopic cylinders (M. Mandelkern & D. M. Crothers, unpublished results). 

The assumptions in our analysis are that rotational and translational motion are described by the same hydrodynamic dimensions, and that hydration has a negligible effect on the measured length because of the small size of the hydration layer compared to the molecular length. The molecular diameter, which is influenced by hydration and by deviations from cylindrical shape, is eliminated as an unknown parameter by measurement of both rotational and translational motion. 

The DNA used in these experiments was derived from the sequenced (Sutcliffe, 1978) plasmid pBR322 by Hue111 digestion. This enzyme, which cuts leaving flush
ends, produced 22 restriction fragments (Sutcliffe, ‘1978) 11 of which were isolated and used in these experiments; the 184 and 192 base-pair fragments were pooled and used together, as were the 123 and 124 base-pair fragments. As illustrated in Figure 1, after preparative gel electrophoresis the fragments were quite pure.

The rotational frictional coefficient (f’“‘) was measured by observing the fieldfree decay of birefringence after orientation in an electric field, and the fieldinduced rise time in birefringence or electric dichroism. The rise times were systematically about 5% longer than the fall times, independent of field at low fields. Generally, the fall time is taken as proportional to the diffusion constant, D (Fredericq & Houssier, 1973) : 

where k is Boltzmann constant, and T is absolute tempperature. However, coupledion-diffusion effects may be responsible for the difference between +$ and T;:;,, and we prefer to consider that the true rotational diffusion constant lies between the limits set by the rise and decay times. The measurements were performed in 0.2 to 10 mix-Na+. It was found that Pt decreased slightly (2 to 3%) in higher salt for the larger fragments (N > 124 base-pairs). The results are summarized in Figure 2.

The translational frictional coefficient was measured by homodyne dynamic light-scattering (Berne & Pecora, 1976). The decay time of the autocorrelation function of the scattered intensity at angle 0 is proportional to the diffusion constant, lItran’ :
n is the refractive index and h t,he wavelength. The correlation time was measured at several angles for each sample, generally at 50 mrvr ionic strength. Addition of NaCl to 100 mM had no effect on T~*~“~. Figure 3 summarizes the results, expressed as the correlation time at 9 = 90” ; the observed angular dependence was as predicted by equation (3)
Figures 2 and 3 contain illustrative calculated values of 7“” and ?‘s for different assumed values of the rise per base-pair (from 3-O A to 3.4 8) and an assumed
diameter of 26 A. These curves were calculated using the standard forms for the frictional coefficients f ‘ra”S (Tirado & de la Terre, 1979) and f”’ (Broersma, 1960) : 
where L is the length of the rod, p its axial ratio (length divided by diameter d) and 7 is the solvent viscosity. The correction factors, y, and yr, were taken from Tirado & de la Torre (1979) and Broersma (1960), respectively. 

The next step in the analysis was determination of the helix diameter by combination of the rotational and translational correlation times. Several methods for accomplishing this end have been described (Chen et al., 1980; Newman et al., 1977; Lee et al., 1981); one is illustrated in Figure 4. For different choices of the diameter, P and Pans are calculated theoretically as functions of length, producing the dependence of P on Pans shown in the Figure, calculated for cl = 22 A and
d = 26 A. The experimental values of P and Pans corresponding to a given fragment are plotted on the same graph. In general, the data lie between the predictions ford = 22 a and d = 26 A, with the latter being the best value when the field-free decay times are used. Since the fiber diffraction data give a diameter of 20.4 A (Amott 6t Hukins, 11)72), a range from 22 t(J 5% A is reasonablr for the hydrodynamic diameter. which is expected to include a hydrat,ion shell. 

In summary of the results in Figures 2 to 4, we conclude that, the helix hydrodynamic diameter lies between 22 i% and 26 a, with a rise per base-pair of
about 3.1 to 3.2 .h. The difference between this result and the 34 !I that w(’estimated earlier (Hoga.n ef al., 1978) is due primarily to the use of only seyuenced
fragments in our present, work, allowing precise specification of the number of basrtpairs, and also to the use of rise times in our earlier work. Because of the weak
(logarithmic) dependence off on diameter, our measurements are not capable of specifying d more precisely. We can, however, pursue calculation of the rise per
base-pair more carefully.

There are two main potential sources of error in the analysis up to this point: the DNA molecules may retain significant flexibility, causing them to deviate from
rigid rod behavior, and the hydrodynamic equations for the rod may not be sufficiently accurate. We have investigated the latter point by analyzing the frictional properties of macroscopic cylinders, with the result that (Mandelkern, 1980: M. Mandelkern & D. M. Crothers, unpublished data):

obtained by combining equations (l), (2) and (6) to obtain the apparent rise per base-pair (L/N),, for each fragment of length I, containing N base-pairs. We
determined (L/N),, for a series of fragments that were as small in size as possible, so as to approach as closely as possible the rigid rod limit. The results are presented in Table 1. A diameter of 26 A was used since the data refer to field-free decay times (see Fig. 2). Axial ratios were estimated with a rise per base-pair of 3.3 a (see below). For p > 20, we used a value of yr = 1.61. close to the value given by the Broersma equation. 

TABLE 1
Apparent rise per base-pair of small DNA fragments
| N (base-pairs) | τ<sub>fall</sub><sup>rot</sup> (μs) | (L/N)<sub>ap</sub> (Å) |\n|---|---|---|\n| 64 | 0.50 ± 0.02 | 3.32 |\n| 80 | 0.80 ± 0.03 | 3.23 |\n| 89 | 1.17 ± 0.02 | 3.35 |\n| 104 | 1.59 ± 0.06 | 3.26 |\n| 124 | 2.22 ± 0.03 | 3.13 |\n| 188 | 5.76 ± 0.01 | 3.00 |\n| 213 | 8.38 ± 0.1 | 3.05 |\n| 234 | 9.22 ± 0.2 | 2.91 |\n| 267 | 11.94 ± 0.2 | 2.83 |

The results in Table 1 show a tendency for the apparent rise per base-pair to decrease when the DNA molecule contains more than about 100 base-pairs; a phenomenon doubtless due to increasing flexibility as molecular length increases. The results for fragments 104 base-pairs and smaller show no experimentally detectable systematic variation of (L/N) with length, and therefore should be close to the actual value. Their range is 3.25 to 3.35 Å, slightly higher than the 3.1 to 3.2 Å estimated in Figures 2 and 3. Part of the calculated length dependence of (L/N) is due to the use of our empirical relationship for ζr. The T value for the N = 64 fragment yields (L/N) = 3.21 Å using Broersma’s value of ζr, rather than 3.32 Å as given in the Table, whereas the two calculations give very similar results for the larger fragments. Hence the Broersma values of ζr overestimate the constancy of (L/N), and tend to mask the small but detectable influence of molecular flexibility in the size range below 150 base-pairs. It would be desirable to extrapolate the data in Table 1 in some manner in order to obtain the true rise per base-pair (L/N) of a perfectly stiff helix. We have used the Hearst (1963) theory for a weakly bending rod to estimate the "bendability" as a function of chain length. From that theory we use the ratio of ζ” for a rigid rod to the value for a weakly bending rod, obtaining the result that is valid near the rigid rod limit:

The chain is modeled as a string of 2n + 1 touching spherical beads of diameter a and spacing b (b = a). The chain length is L = 2n,b, and the persistence length is b/2h.
The form of equation (9) suggests a plot of (L/N) against the bendability index f(n) = (4.5 In n - 6.2)/(91 n n-2.76). The intercept at f(n) = 0 gives (L/N), and the slope h(L/N) allows estimation of the persistence length. We used b = 26 Å to estimate n and thus calculate f(n). Figure 5 shows the results. The extrapolated value (L/N) is 3.34(±0.03) Å. Given the additional uncertainties due to lack of precision in the diameter and the choice of orientational rise or decay times, we estimate the total probable range of error to be about ±0.8. The resulting rise per base-pair of 3.34(±0.8) Å is clearly within the range of values found for natural DNA in the B form. Hence we find no detectable variation in the length of DNA in solution from the structural parameters deduced from the study of fibers.
Another technique by which the rise per base-pair in solution can be determined is light or low-angle X-ray scattering. Eisenberg & Cohen's (1968) analysis of light-scattering data gives a value of 3.25 Å per base-pair, with X-ray scattering results varying from 2.7 to 3.25 Å per base-pair. Precision in the measurement of absolute scattering intensities, concentrations and density increments may account for the variability. Furthermore, the theory used for the analysis assumes that DNA is a rod; the problem of possible corrections due to bendability has not been studied quantitatively.
The DNA persistence length calculated from the slope in Figure 5 is 450(±50) Å, on the low side of the range of values reported for that parameter (see Kovacic & van Holde, 1977; Hearst & Reese, 1980; Elias & Eden, 1981; Hagerman, 1981). (It should be realized that the exact value found for the persistence length is model and theory-dependent, and may differ if evaluated exclusively for very short rods, as in our experiment.) Also, we note that the Hearst (1963) theory for calculation of the bendability index f(n) is approximate and breaks down when n is small. Hence the points, especially for small fragments, are not positioned precisely on the f(n) axis in Figure 5. However, given the scatter of the data and the other sources of error in determination of (L/N), the weakness of the theory is relatively unimportant for the extrapolation process, except that the resulting persistence length is only approximate.
The error bars in Figure 5 correspond to an error of approximately 5% in the measurement of the orientational decay time, substantially greater than the apparent reproducibility of that measurement. The significant scatter of the values of (L/N) about the average line raises the possibility that the rise per base-pair (or possibly the persistence length) is not strictly constant but sequence-dependent. This might be of importance for protein-DNA recognition when the protein contacts the DNA at two separate sites, since the apparently non-interacting base-pairs between the two sites would nonetheless be essential for establishing the correct distance relationship between the sites.
This work was supported by grants GM21966 and RR07015 from the National Institutes of Health. We thank Paul Hagerman and Bruno Zimm for communicating their results to us in advance of publication. 

