A practicable and accurate method to differentiate between intra- and extracellular water of microbial cells

Abstract
A thermographimetric method which allows for a quick and accurate estimation of intra- and extracellular water of microbial cells is reviewed and improved. Knowledge of these fractions is important for physiological as well as for toxicological investigations. Results of the study indicate that besides the species, nutrient availability and growth conditions affect the intracellular water content. Intra- and extracellular water, dry matter, volume and density of a single cell of Arthrobacter sp. are calculated. There are indications that intracellular compartments of eukaryotes could also be investigated with this method.

1 Introduction
Liquid water is, due to its physico-chemical characteristics, an essential prerequisite for the development of life. The water content of microbial cells varies between 70–90% of the total weight depending on species and on the stage of life [1,2]. Water availability, indicated by the water activity, is the quotient of vapour pressure of water in solution and the vapour pressure of pure water. The water availability must, except for some osmophilic organisms, not decrease beyond 0.9 [2].

The water content of living cells is not only an important parameter in connection with all physiological processes but also of interest concerning the effects of toxic substances. Usually, amounts of elements are measured relative to dry matter (DM). However, the calculation of the concentration of toxic or beneficial elements in the cytosol requires knowledge of the volume of the cell or at least of the intracellular water, Wi. Thus, several attempts have been made to differ between Wi and the extracellular water, We. NMR and scintilisation have both been proved to be suitable techniques to determine Wi[3,4]. The disadvantage of these methods is the great expenditure of instruments, personal and thus costs. Image analyses suffer from the great expenditure of man power and of their limitation when small bacteria are to be investigated [5]. Oil centrifugation is a feasible method [6] but the assumption that only 5% of the water loss during drying can be referred to extracellular water is speculative and needs to be verified for each single species. Especially micro-organisms excreting hydrophilic slimes and/or capsules may differ distinctly from the assumed 5% level.

Within this manuscript, the thermogravimetrical method of [7] is called back to mind. The method uses a fascinating simple basic assumption (see below) but suffers in its original form from a labour intensive evaluation of the results. By modifying the analysis of the weight losses gained throughout the drying, the technique turns out to be an accurate and easy feasible method to differ between Wi and We of microbial cells.

2 Materials and methods
2.1 Organisms
Two micro-organisms were tested within the investigation: a ‘large’ eukaryote (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and a ‘small’ prokaryote (Arthrobacter sp.). The yeast was used to enable a comparison with the original data [7]. The latter organism, a member of the very abundant group of the corynefom bacteria, was isolated from a forest soil and is under investigation in connection with metal sensitivity [8].

2.2 Media and culture conditions
S. cerevisiae was grown in malt extract medium (ME), containing malt extract, 30 g and mycological peptone, 5 g −1 l. The final pH was 5.5. Arthrobacter sp. was grown in three media with a decreasing nutrient availability (amounts are given in g l−1). (i) Standard nutrient broth (Merck number 7882): peptone, 15.6 g; yeast extract, 2.8 g; NaCl, 5.6 g; glucose, 1 g; pH 7.5. (ii) Bacto peptone solution (BP, Difco number 0118-01): bacto peptone, 10 g. (iii) Soil extract solution (SES): glucose, 0.1 g; yeast extract, 0.1 g; K2HPO4, 0.05 g; soil extract, 40 ml, according to [8]. Both micro-organisms were incubated during 2 days at 25°C on a horizontal shaker (200 rpm) in 2000-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 1000 ml of the respective nutrient solution. To yield ponderable amounts of microbial biomass of Arthrobacter sp., these large volumes of culture solution were necessary. Although we had to tolerate this unusual high volume of medium relative to the volume of flasks for the above reasons, growth seemed not to be limited by aeration as the cell density arose to 4.5×108 cells per ml within 48 h. The produced biomass of 3×1000 ml nutrient solution had to be gathered in some cases instead of using for replicate measurements. However, the collected biomass produced in 3×1000 ml nutrient solution itself stands for a representative figure.

2.3 Sample preparation
The cells were harvested after 48 h through centrifugation (8000×g, 15 min) or filtration (0.22 µm). To test the influence of washed, calcined quartz fine granular (diameter between 0.2 and 0.8 mm; Merck 7536) on the weight losses during drying, the granular was mixed with the bacterial sediment in equal parts.

2.4 Drying and basic assumption of the method
An infra-red balance (Mettler LP16) which was interfaced to a computer was used for the investigation. Weight was measured automatically every 6 s till no further change in weight could be recognised (about 40 min after starting).

The basic assumption of the method is that drying of microbial cells occurs during two phases (Fig. 1). First, the more volatile extracellular water We is lost. Not before this fraction is completely evaporated, the intracellular water Wi starts to vaporise. The change between the two phases (the so-called critical point, CP) can be detected in the form of a small bulge. This change in drying behaviour should be caused by the membrane and/or the cell wall as this briefly protects Wi against evaporation. Unfortunately, in a practical operation, the CP is hardly detectable without some manipulation of the raw data. Uribelarrea et al. ([7]) used a graphical method to evade these problems. However, their method is quite labour intensive and not very precise for small amounts of microbial cells. In these days, several computer programs enable a quick smoothing and subsequent derivation of data. We used the second derivation (f″(x)) to determine the CP. As can be deduced from Fig. 1, the CP must be located between two inflection points (f″(x)=0) and should be characterised by a minimum of f″(x) which indicates a minimum radius of curvature of the original curve.

2.5 Cell size and number
Cell size and number were determined in cultures of Arthrobacter sp. by a Coulter® Multisizer II (aperture diameter of the orifice tube was 20 µm, dilutions were made in ISOTON® II, 50 µl of the dilutions was actually measured, containing between 500 and 100 000 cells).

3 Results and discussion
The sample preparation influenced We but had no effect on Wi. Neither procedure of harvesting (filtration or centrifugation) nor the addition of quartz led to different drying courses or to an easier detection of the CP. The reverse was true: when filter plates were dried together with the microbial cells under investigation, a flattening of the anyway small bulge occurred and should therefore be avoided.

A typical weight loss of Arthrobacter sp. during the first 20 min of drying (the asymptotical convergence towards the DM is cut off) is shown in Fig. 2. The two inflection points and the minimum of f″(x) could easily be detected in Fig. 3. The fractions of intra- and extracellular water could therefore be extrapolated from raw data (f(x), Fig. 2) again.

Wi values relative to DM of S. cerevisiae and Arthrobacter sp. are given in Table 1. Percentages of DM per g of fresh weight are not presented as these values vary to a great extent depending mainly on the sample preparation. However, the total water contents are about 10% higher than the more exact data given in Table 1 and thus correspond better with data from literature, where usually no differentiation between intra- and extracellular water is made [1,2]. Obviously, the Wi content of Arthrobacter sp. varies depending on the nutrient availability, a finding which corresponds with assumptions after microscopic investigations. It is also known from literature that the cell volume and thus water content and weight of micro-organisms can vary distinctly depending on the nutrient availability and stage of life [9,10].

Table 1 Contents of intracellular water (Wi) in cells of S. cerevisiae and Arthrobacter sp.
| Organism | Medium | W₁ (g g⁻¹ DM) | Wᵢ (% of cell) |\n|---|---|---|---|\n| *S. cerevisiae* | ME | 1.525 ± 0.004 | 60.4 ± 0.2 |\n| *Arthrobacter* sp. | STI | 1.638 | 62.1 |\n|  | BP | 2.130 ± 0.12 | 68.1 ± 1.2 |\n|  | SES | 1.322 | 56.9 |

Cell weights are calculated by adding DM plus intracellular water (Wi). Contents of total water (Wi and We) per g fresh weight (total water plus DM) are not given as these figures vary distinctly depending on the sample preparation. Values given without S.D. were derived from gathered biomass instead of replicates (see text).

From [7], the Wi of S. cerevisiae was calculated to be 1.1 g g−1 DM which is beyond the results shown in Table 1. However, growth conditions (nutrition, incubation time and temperature) differ from the ones used within the present investigation and may therefore be responsible for the difference [9]. Quiros et al. ([3]) calculated the Wi of Streptomyces antibioticus to be 0.81 and 1.56 ml g−1 DM for dormant spores and vegetative mycelium, respectively. This again indicates the great variability depending on the stage of growth even within a species.

The volume of cells of Arthrobacter sp. grown in SES was determined by a Coulter® counter to be 0.369±0.004 µm3 (average of 22 000 cells), the cell titre was 4.500×108±0.009×108 cells per ml. Thus, the weights of DM and water of one single cell could be calculated, resulting in 0.2326±0.0005, 0.3047±0.0006 and 0.1200±0.0002 pg for DM, Wi and We, respectively. The cell of Arthrobacter sp. per se (indicated by Wi plus DM but except We) had a weight of 0.5400±0.0008 pg. From this total cell weight, a density of 1.4634±0.0169 g cm−3 cell volume could be computed. These figures correspond well with data derived from [11], where also a density of 1.5 g cm−3 is given. Neidhardt et al. [1] calculated the weight of one cell of Escherichia coli to be 0.95 pg. As E. coli is slightly greater than Arthrobacter sp. and as nutrition has been shown to have a great influence on the volume of microbial cells [9], the order of magnitude of these data confirms our findings. Very few data exist about densities of microbial cells: López-Amarós et al. ([10]) determined the volume of E. coli to lie between 0.4 and 3.2 µm3. Combining these figures with the data given by [1] results in densities between 0.29 and 2.3 g cm−3, again elucidating the need for further research.

A principle difference between the drying coarses of S. cerevisiae and Arthrobacter sp. was ascertained: when investigating S. cerevisiae, one or two further pairs of inflection points with intermediate minima of f″(x) were detectable at a later time during the drying course (Fig. 4), whereas this was not true for Arthrobacter sp. This indicates one or two further barriers that must be broken through drought. The membranes of the intracellular organelles (nucleus, mitochondria vacuoles, etc.) of S. cerevisiae seem very likely to cause these further bulges as no such structures exist in the prokaryotic cells of Arthrobacter sp. If this hypothesis turns out to be true, a further promising field for investigation can be opened by the application of this method.

