Intracellular water-specific MR of microbead-adherent cells: the HeLa cell intracellular water exchange lifetime

Abstract
Quantitative characterization of the intracellular water (1)H MR signal from cultured cells will provide critical biophysical insight into the MR signal from tissues in vivo. Microbeads provide a robust immobilization substrate for the many mammalian cell lines that adhere to surfaces and also provide sufficient cell density for observation of the intracellular water MR signal. However, selective observation of the intracellular water MR signal from perfused, microbead-adherent mammalian cells requires highly effective suppression of the extracellular water MR signal. We describe how high-velocity perfusion of microbead-adherent cells results in short apparent (1)H MR longitudinal and transverse relaxation times for the extracellular water in a thin slice selected orthogonal to the direction of flow. When combined with a spin-echo pulse sequence, this phenomenon provides highly effective suppression of the extracellular water MR signal. This new method is exploited here to quantify the kinetics of water exchange from the intracellular to extracellular spaces of HeLa cells. The time constant describing water exchange from intracellular to extracellular spaces, also known as the exchange lifetime for intracellular water, is 119 +/- 14 ms.

INTRODUCTION
Selective monitoring of the 1H MR signal fromintracellular water in cultured mammalian cell systemswould allow characterization of biophysical properties ofintracellular water that are important for quantitativeinterpretation of MR signals from tissue in vivo. Severalmethods have been proposed to discriminate betweenintracellular and extracellular water MR signals inbiological systems such as cell suspensions, perfused cells,and intact tissues (1). These methods are based ondifferences in the MR properties of intracellular andextracellular water, including resonance frequencies (2–6),longitudinal or transverse relaxation times (7–9), anddiffusion coefﬁcients (10–12).
The method presented here, which uses a microbead-adherent (stationary) cell system, takes advantage ofthe high-velocity, turbulent ﬂow of extracellular perfu-sate. In the presence of a slice-selective, spin-echopulse sequence, the ﬂow results in very rapid apparentlongitudinal and transverse relaxation (13–16) of extra-cellular water in the slice of interest. The ﬂow-driveninﬂux (washin) of equilibrium-state spins quickly returnsextracellular water in the slice to full (equilibrium)longitudinal polarization. Rapid, turbulent ﬂow in thepresence of slice-selective radio frequency pulses andstrong concomitant gradient pulses results in efﬁcientdestruction of transverse phase coherence. In addition,ﬂow-driven efﬂux (washout) of spins from the slice alsoserves to diminish transverse magnetization.
Two beneﬁts accrue from the situation in which theﬂow-dominated apparent transverse and longitudinalrelaxation of extracellular water is very rapid, put moreprecisely, when the apparent transverse and longitudinalrelaxation times of extracellular water are much shorterthan the exchange lifetime of extracellular water. First,the signal contribution from extracellular water iscompletely suppressed because of ﬂow (very rapidapparent transverse relaxation). Thus, the acquired MRsignal arises only from intracellular water. Second,solutions to the Bloch–McConnell equations (17,18) fortwo-site (intracellular/extracellular) exchange are greatlysimpliﬁed. Of particular interest here, longitudinalrelaxation of intracellular water is deﬁned by an observed monoexponential magnetization recovery curve, thedeﬁning rate constant of which, (T1,obs)1, is the sumof two rate constants monoexponential magnetization recovery curve, thedeﬁning rate constant of which, (T1,obs)1, is the sumof two rate constants the observed relaxation time for intracellular water isidentical with the exchange lifetime In what follows, we show for a perfused, microbead-adherent HeLa cell system that: (i) the apparent relaxationof extracellular water is dominated by ﬂow effects; (ii) theapparent relaxation is sufﬁciently rapid to completelysuppress signal from extracellular water; (iii) theintracellular longitudinal relaxation is slow relative toexchange of water between the intracellular andextracellular compartments, being nearly described byeqn (3); and, thus, (iv) this method, when combined withan inversion-recovery pulse sequence, yields the intra-cellular water lifetime.Although the effects of ﬂow in MR have been wellstudied (14,16,19,20), to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrsttime this method has been used to separate intracellularand extracellular water signals, as well as measureintracellular water lifetime. This procedure should beapplicable with any microbead-adherent cell type and isdescribed here as a ‘proof of principle’ study applied tothe robust HeLa cell line.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Suppression of the extracellular water signal by theslice-selective spin-echo experiment and the ﬂowdominance of apparent longitudinal and transverserelaxation were ﬁrst veriﬁed by measuring the depen-dence of the MR signal amplitude on the perfusate ﬂowrate (higher ﬂow rates give greater suppression ofextracellular water signal) in microbead systems withand without HeLa cells present. The slice-selectiveinversion-recovery spin-echo experiment was then usedin the presence of HeLa cells and ﬂowing perfusate to measure the exchange-modiﬁed longitudinal relaxationtime of intracellular water (T1,obs ). An independent cellrelaxation measurement was made for pelleted cellswithout medium to estimate the longitudinal relaxationtime of intracellular water in the absence of exchange(T1,in ). The lifetime of intracellular water (tin) was thenderived using eqn (1).

HeLa cell culture and perfusion procedures
Cell culture and perfusion. HeLa cells were grown asmonolayers on polystyrene microcarrier beads (NalgeNunc, Rochester, NY, USA) of 160–300 mm diameter. Cellswere cultured in a 95% O2/5% CO2 atmosphere (378C) for3 days to reach conﬂuence in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’smedium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum,2 mm L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 mg/mLstreptomycin. Microbeads coated with cells were trans-ferred to a 6.0-mm internal diameter glass tube.Pre-warmed medium equilibrated with 95% O2 and5% CO2 was pumped through the glass tube, and aball-ﬂoat ﬂow meter was used to monitor the volumetricperfusion rate. During the time it takes for perfusionmedium to travel from the face of the magnet to the sampletube, it becomes completely (Boltzmann) polarized. Aﬁber-optic probe was inserted into the glass tube to monitorthe temperature (378C). For control experiments withoutcells, microcarrier beads only were placed in the mediumfor 3 days and transferred to the MR sample tube.

Cell pellets. For experiments performed on cell pellets,cells were cultured in a 162-cm 2 ﬂask for 3 days to reachconﬂuence, then washed with PBSA solution (thecalcium- and magnesium-free Dulbecco’s phosphatebuffered saline solution A) and trypsin for 5 minto release cells from the ﬂask. Cell pellets were preparedby centrifugation at 400 g in a 50-mL centrifuge tube for3 min. Cells were then transferred to a 4-mm internaldiameter glass tube and centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min.Cell pellets prepared by this procedure have less than 5%extracellular water (21). MR measurements were ﬁnishedwithin 30 min of centrifugation at 178C.

Other procedures. Light-microscopic images of cellson beads were acquired with a Nikon Diaphot 300 micro-scope.

MR experimentsGeneral. All 1H MR experiments were performed in a4.7-T, 40-cm horizontal Oxford Instruments (Abingdon,Oxfordshire, UK) magnet equipped with a 10-cm innerdiameter Magnex Scientiﬁc (Kidlington, Oxfordshire,UK) gradient set, a Techron (Elkhart, IN, USA) model8300 gradient power supply, and a Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) UNITYINOVA console. Bayesian analysis (http://bayesiananalysis.wustl.edu/) was used to estimate signalamplitude of the acquired time-domain data andrelaxation times from the inversion-recovery data(22–24).

Velocity-sensitive spin-echo 1 H MR experi-ments. An 8-mm wide piece of copper foil was wrappedaround the perfusion sample tube to serve as a1H transmit/receive solenoid coil. A 100-mm thick sliceoriented orthogonal to the ﬂow direction was deﬁned byfrequency selective p and p/2 pulses (4 ms) in thepresence of slice-selection gradients (23 G/cm) appliedparallel to the ﬂow direction: TE ¼ 25 ms, TR ¼ 10 s. Onlythe second half of the echo was acquired. The acquisitiontime was 120 ms. Signals from 10 different slices spaced300 mm apart were acquired in an order opposite to theﬂow direction. To improve signal-to-noise ratio, foursignal averages were taken by cycling four times throughthe 10 slices. The volumetric perfusion rate ranged from 0to 125 mL/min depending on the experimental purpose.Two sets of data were acquired, one from the perfusedcell-bearing microbeads and one from the control sample(microbeads without cells).

Inve rsion-recovery 1H MR experiments. Aslice-selective inversion pulse was inserted before theslice-selective, spin-echo sequence to measure theexchange-modiﬁed longitudinal relaxation time of intra-cellular water. The inversion time was increasedincrementally from 3.5 ms to 3.8 s. The time delaybefore each inversion pulse was longer than ﬁve times themeasured relaxation time. Various concentrations (0, 5,15 mM) of gadodiamide (Omniscan, Amersham Health,Little Chalfont, Bucks., UK) were added to the medium toproduce different inherent spin-lattice relaxation times ofthe extracellular medium, i.e. that which would bemeasured in the absence of ﬂow. Samples of medium withgadodiamide were collected after the perfusion exper-iment, and the inherent spin-lattice relaxation time wasmeasured from each sample with an inversion-recoverypulse sequence.The longitudinal relaxation time of HeLa cell intra-cellular water in the absence of exchange was estimatedfrom cell pellets via a slice-selective inversion-recoveryspin-echo pulse sequence with a laboratory-constructed,6-mm-internal-diameter solenoid coil at TE ¼ 25 ms andslice thickness ¼ 100 mm. Inversion times ranged from3.5 ms to 16 s. A 10-s time delay before each inversionpulse was used to ensure complete recovery of magnetiza-tion. Four signal averages were obtained.

RESULTS
On light microscopy (Fig. 1), HeLa cells have the shape ofa half sphere on the surface of microbeads, and the average diameter of these half spheres is 20 mm. In theperfusion system, the volume ratio of intracellular toextracellular water was 5%, estimated from cell diameter,cell number, bead weight, bead density and bead powderdensity; the last two variables were provided by themanufacturer.
In experiments with perfusion medium ﬂowing througha collection of cell-free packed microbeads, the watersignal amplitude from the perfusion medium (circles,Fig. 2) diminished into the noise as the ﬂow rate of theperfusion medium increased. However, in the equivalentexperiments using microbeads with attached cells, thewater signal amplitude (triangles, Fig. 2) reached aplateau with a signal-to-noise ratio of 40, well above thenoise ﬂoor. Figure 3 shows representative 1H MR spectrafrom cell-free packed microbeads (A and C) andmicrobeads with attached cells (B and D). In the plateauregion of Fig. 2 (triangles), the signal acquired fromperfused cells shows a very slight decrease as ﬂow rateincreases. This may reﬂect a population of watermolecules closely associated with the external surfaceof the cell membrane exiting the slice at the progressivelyhigher ﬂow velocities.
The longitudinal magnetization recovery time constantobserved with the microbead-adherent cells in thepresence of high-velocity perfusion (T1,obs) was 109  12 ms (n ¼ 3). The value of T1,obs did not changeappreciably as the inherent spin-lattice relaxation time ofthe medium was reduced from 2.5 s to 10 ms by theaddition of gadodiamide (Fig. 4). (Note that theassessment of signal amplitude at 15 mM gadodiamide-10 ms relaxation time – was difﬁcult because thelinewidth of the observed water resonance broadenedfrom 20 Hz to 300 Hz, presumably because of inhomo-geneous bulk susceptibility effects.) The inherentintracellular water spin-lattice relaxation time (T1,in )was estimated from packed cells (pellets) to be1.19  0.06 s (n ¼ 3) at 178C. [At 378C this value willincrease by 10% (25).] The intracellular water lifetime at378C (tin) was calculated as 119  14 ms using eqn (1).

DISCUSSION
As noted above, the two-site, exchange-modiﬁed Blochequations take on a simpliﬁed form when the apparenttransverse and longitudinal relaxation times of extra-cellular water are much shorter than its exchange lifetime.At high perfusion velocities, the apparent relaxation timesof extracellular water should be ﬂow-dominated and veryshort.

The inherent spin-lattice relaxation time of theperfusion medium in the absence of relaxation agentwas measured to be 2.5 s (data not shown). Although theprocess is unlikely to be purely monoexponential, a‘pseudo time constant’ describing re-establishment oflongitudinal magnetization caused by ﬂow, speciﬁcallyslice-speciﬁc washin of medium, can be estimated as0.63 V0 /n, where V0 is the medium volume of the selectedslice, and n is the volumetric ﬂow rate (20). In ourperfusion system, V0 is calculated from the slicethickness, glass tube diameter, and the fractional volume occupied by the microbeads in the glass sample tube.When n is 125 mL/min, the derived time constant is0.5 ms. Comparing the two time constants, 0.5 ms versus2.5 s, it is clear that ﬂow-driven re-establishment oflongitudinal magnetization is far more efﬁcient than theinherent spin-lattice relaxation of the perfusion medium.Thus, ﬂow dominates the apparent longitudinal relaxationof extracellular water.

The inherent transverse relaxation time of the mediumis 0.7 s (data not shown). The pseudo time constantdescribing loss of transverse magnetization due to ﬂow isexpected to be even shorter than that describingre-establishment of longitudinal magnetization due toﬂow. This is because, in addition to the slice-speciﬁcwashout of medium, turbulent ﬂow (variable velocities) inthe presence of the strong ﬁeld gradients required for sliceselection relentlessly drives loss of transverse magnetiza-tion phase coherence. A pseudo time constant governingloss of transverse magnetization due to ﬂow can beindependently estimated from the decrease in signalamplitude acquired from the perfusion medium ﬂowingthrough cell-free packed microbeads. At ﬂow rateshigher than 40 mL/min, a signal attenuation of at least99% was observed with TE ¼ 25 ms (circles, Fig. 2). Thisimplies a time constant describing loss of transversemagnetization due to ﬂow of signiﬁcantly less than 4.6 msat 125 mL/min. Again, ﬂow-driven loss of transversemagnetization is far more efﬁcient than the inherenttransverse relaxation of the perfusion medium. Thus, ﬂowdominates the apparent transverse relaxation of extra-cellular water.

The equilibrium condition requires an equal rate ofwater exchange between the two compartments and, thus,that the lifetimes of intracellular and extracellularcompartments (tin and tex) are proportional to theaqueous population fractions of the two compartments( fin and fex)

Given fin/fex 5/100 and, as will be discussed below,tin  100 ms, tex is then of the order of 2 s for themicrobead-adherent HeLa cell system under study. Thus,the conditions required to simplify the Bloch equationshold. Speciﬁcally, the apparent transverse and longitudi-nal relaxation times of extracellular water (1 ms) aremuch shorter than the exchange lifetime of extracellularwater (2 s).

The ratio of MR signal amplitudes when microbead-adherent cells are perfused at ﬂow rates of 125 and 0 mL/min is 9% in Fig. 2 (triangles). Correcting forrelaxation and diffusion effects in the two compartmentsgives an MR-determined water volume ratio of 8%. Thisvalue is consistent with the roughly estimated intracellu-lar water volume ratio of 5%. However, whereasperfusion medium signal suppression was complete withpacked microbeads in the absence of adhering HeLa cells,extracellular medium ‘trapped’ in the presence ofadhering cells may contribute to the residual signalamplitude shown in Fig. 2 (triangles). If this were thecase, the observed longitudinal relaxation time would beexpected to decrease markedly with the addition ofrelaxation agent to the extracellular medium. Such adecrease was not observed. Indeed, despite a reduction inthe inherent spin-lattice relaxation time of the perfusion medium from 2.5 s to 14 ms, the longitudinal relaxationtime of the residual signal did not change appreciably(Fig. 4). This provides further evidence that longitudinalrelaxation of extracellular water is fully ﬂow-dominatedand gives no support for the putative presence of asemi-static pool of extracellular water that wouldcontribute to the signal at high perfusion ﬂow rate.Measurement of the intracellular longitudinal relaxa-tion time of packed HeLa cells gives an estimate for T1,inof 1.2 s, which is consistent with the results reported byWheatley et al. (25), but is considerably longer than thevalue of 0.7 s reported by Beall et al. (26). Althoughpacked cells are probably in a hypoxic/anoxic state, it isunlikely that the intracellular T1 is highly sensitive tooxygenation status. Numerous tissues in vivo, for whichcell densities are high and capillary beds provide efﬁcientoxygen delivery, have T1 values 1 s and show onlymodest T1 changes in death. Thus, cell pellets offer areasonable means of estimating T1,in . For the derivation oftin, it is not crucial that the estimate of T1,in be highlyaccurate given that it is clearly much greater (10-fold)than the measured T1,obs (1.2 s versus 0.11 s). Speciﬁcally,given this differential, the accurate determination of tinvia eqn (1) depends primarily on the measurement ofT1,obs. Indeed, the derived tin (0.12 s) is essentiallyequivalent to T1,obs (0.11 s); the system is close to thecondition [eqn (2)] where the limiting case of eqn (3)holds.

If Fick’s law holds true for water exchanging throughthe cell membrane, tin is related to cell membranepermeability through the following relation (7,27):
where P is the membrane permeability coefﬁcient (cm/s),Vin is the total cell volume, and A is the cell surface area.The HeLa cell volume is 2.6 10 3 mm3 as estimated fromthe cell diameter measured under the light microscope.The surface area of the half-spherical microbead-attachedcell, not including the area in contact with the microbead,is 7.2 10 2 mm2 . The diffusional permeability of the cellmembrane calculated via eqn (5) is 3.6 103 cm/s. Theabove value for the cell surface area is probably anunderestimate because the cell surface is not smooth.Nevertheless, the estimated permeability is within therange reported by others for mammalian cells using verydifferent methodologies (9,28). This agreement supportsthe validity of the MR-based method described here.

CONCLUSION
A method has been developed to select the intracellularwater MR signal from perfused, microbead-adherentmammalian cells using a ﬂow-related extracellular waterMR signal suppression mechanism. When a thin MRexcitation slice is deﬁned, the high rate of perfusate ﬂow acts as a very efﬁcient apparent longitudinal andtransverse relaxation mechanism for extracellular water(perfusion medium) in the slice. When a slice-selectivespin-echo pulse sequence is used, MR signal from theextracellular compartment is strongly suppressed, allow-ing selection of the intracellular water signal. The strikingdifference in the intracellular and extracellular compart-mental relaxation time constants under these conditionsprovides the means to derive tin from the exchange-modiﬁed longitudinal relaxation of intracellular water. InHeLa cells, tin was estimated to be 0.12 s. This deﬁnes atime scale for measuring physical properties inherent tointracellular water in cultured HeLa cells. The method-ology developed here should be applicable to a widerange of other microbead-adherent cultured mammaliancells. It provides a valuable tool for probing the propertiesof intracellular water in cultured mammalian cells. Suchmeasurements can provide biophysical parameterscritical to our understanding of the MR signal arisingfrom mammalian tissue in vivo.



